---
layout: documentation
title: Ruby Library Packages
sort_info: 15
---

# Ruby Library Packages
{:.no_toc}

- TOC
{:toc}

On the C++ side, we have already discussed the separation between the bulk of
the implementation in C++ libraries and their framework integration in
components.

The same should be applied on the Ruby side of the system. A lot of the
functionality needed to e.g. look at diagnostics data streams from the
components can be made framework-independent (i.e. Syskit independent). It is
somehow weaker in the Ruby case though, as in the end most of the data
processing is done in C++ in a Rock system.

For code meant to be executed within Syskit, generally speaking, **do not do
too many things within the Syskit process**. Syskit is in charge of
coordinating the system's components, and having long computations within the
Syskit process will increase Syskit's reaction times.

## Creating and Adding Packages to the Workspace

This is covered in the [Workspace and Packages section](../workspace/add_packages.html)

**Executive Summary**: You need to first pick a category and a name [the workspace
conventions](../workspace/conventions.html) for information about how to name
your library package.

The Ruby packages are expected to follow the de-factor standard Ruby package
layout set forth by RubyGems. The best way to create a new ruby package is to
use [`bundle gem`](https://bundler.io/v1.15/guides/creating_gem.html) and add
Rock's [`manifest.xml`](../workspace/add_packages.html) to it.

When using VSCode, the package will not be picked up by the [`vscode-rock`
extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=rock-robotics.rock)
until it is part of the main manifest.
Adding the package path to the layout section of `autoproj/manifest` is
enough at this stage. You will however have to [define the
package](../workspace/add_packages.html) in the autobuild and `source.yml`
files before you push the updated manifest to your team members. For instance,
when creating `tools/timeseries` one would do

~~~
bundle gem tools/timeseries
<create tools/timeseries/manifest.xml>
~~~

and then add

~~~yaml
layout:
  - ...
  - tools/timeseries
~~~

`autoproj` runs `rake` within the package during the build, which means that
it runs the `Rakefile`'s `default` task.

## Integrating 3rd-party libraries

External gems can be installed by autoproj using [the osdeps
mechanism](../workspace/os_dependencies.html). For now, autoproj does not know
how to look at a package's gemspec (which defines the gem's dependencies), so
you will have to duplicate dependencies between the gemspec and the
`manifest.xml`.

You may also install them in the workspace if you plan to work on them. You
would however have to declare their path manually within `autoproj/Gemfile`
to make sure the checked out repository is used:

~~~
gem 'timeseries', path: File.expand_path(File.join('..', 'tools', 'timeseries'), __dir__)
~~~

## Package Dependencies

It is common for packages to depend on other packages.

When adding a dependency to a Ruby package, you **must** add it to the
package's `manifest.xml` file. If you do mean to distribute your Ruby package
as a RubyGem, you will also have to modify the bundler-generated `gemspec`
file.

## Tests

Testing is now an integral part of modern development process, and Rock
provides support to integrate unit testing in the development workflow.

Ruby packages are expected to provide a `test` target in their `Rakefile` to run
the tests. The `Rakefile` generated by `bundle gem` has one.

Rock's preferred test framework is `minitest` and mocking framework is `flexmock`.

## Type System Plugins

In order to smooth the interface between the Rock type system and the Ruby
layers, one [can provide a
`typelib_plugin.rb`](../components/types_in_ruby.html) file within a Ruby
package. Just put the file under your package's main directory (e.g.
`lib/mypackage/typelib_plugin.rb`) to have it automatically loaded.

Let's go now to the Rock specific part of functionality integration, [components](../components/index.html)
{: .next-page}
